
title: Motivation:About Reducing the Inadvertent Spread of Retracted Science: Shaping a Research and Implementation Agenda
permalink: /projects/risrs2020/motivation
------Retracted papers insinuate themselves into the scientific publication network via citations both before and after retraction, which inadvertently propagates potentially faked data, fundamental errors, and unreproducible results. Research over the past decade has identified a number of factors contributing to the unintentional spread of retracted research. Many retracted papers are not marked as retracted on publisher and aggregator sites; many post-retraction PDFs are not watermarked and pre-retraction PDFs may be found in readers' PDF libraries including in reference management systems such as Zotero, EndNote, and Mendeley. Most publishers do not systematically surveil bibliographies of submitted manuscripts, and most editors do not query whether a citation to a retracted paper is justified. When citing retracted papers, authors are not required to identify retraction status in bibliographies or in-text citations.Collaboration across diverse stakeholders in the academic publishing ecosystem is needed to reduce the inadvertent spread of retracted science. This is a critical moment for stakeholder dialogue, because the data needed to identify retracted research has become available. In October 2018, Retraction Watch released a comprehensive 
database of all known retractions. Currently, the database has limited availability on the web, with bulk use arranged for private research use or by commercial licensing. However, a sustainability model for continuing to update and steward retraction data is critically needed. 
layout: page

The project team will host a workshop to bring together diverse stakeholdersto develop a series of research-informed outcomes (scientific workshops, policies, and industry tools) to reduce the citation and reuse of retracted publications.Significant pre-workshop activities will be undertaken (including literature review, citation analysis, stakeholder interviews and the writing and dissemination of stakeholder statements)which will seed the workshop themesand promote dynamic discussions that lead to an actionable agenda. The specific activities of the participating experts will be:1.Aninterview to exploretheir professional experience with the retraction process and share their thoughts about how to address the circulation and citation of retracted science.2.Attendance at avirtual workshop which will be a series of structured discussions over several days in October and November20203.The contribution of a discussion paper prior to the workshop which will be shared on this website to help inform the agenda setting activities4.A post-workshop outcomes surveyFollowing the stakeholder workshop, PI Schneider will develop a consensus white paper with a coherent, actionable set of recommendations for next steps and disseminate the recommendations at select conferences. The goal is that these recommendations will lead to tangible plans for implementing next steps, in cooperation with industry partners within scientific publishing as well as government policymakers and academic institutions.For questions about the research study, please contact Dr. Jodi Schneider at (217) 300-4328 or jodi@illinois.eduAny questions or concerns about your rights as a participant please contact the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Office for the Protection of Research Subjects at (217) 333-2670 or via email at irb@illinois.edu.

Following the stakeholder workshop, PI Schneider will develop a consensus white paper with a coherent, actionable set of recommendations for next steps and disseminate the recommendations at select conferences. The goal is that these recommendations will lead to tangible plans for implementing next steps, in cooperation with industry partners within scientific publishing as well as government policymakers and academic institutions.